- Senior software developers are experts
at generalizing a problem and developing a solution
that solves a wider set of problems
than the originally intended.
Let me walk you through an example to show you what I mean.
Let's imagine that you received a user story
in your latest sprint that requires you to update
the authentication mechanism in a service
to use an encrypted token provided by the company's
new identity management platform.
Upon receiving the token,
your service needs to verify its authenticity
with the identity management platform
and then decrypt the token to access information
about the authenticated user,
like their permissions within the system.
You could just write the code
to verify the token and decrypt it
right within your service
and then check the user's permissions in that code.
This would solve the problem.
But then you think about the problem more broadly
and recognize that your system consists
of dozens of services that need to authenticate the user
and check their system permissions.
So you package your code into a library
that can be shared across all your services.
Excellent.
So now you have some reusability,
but what about all the other development teams
in your organization?
They will need to use
the new identity management platform as well.
So after stewing it over a bit,
you decide to abstract the parts of your code
that perform the permissions checks
and pull the information specific to your system service
out into a configuration file.
Now your library can be used by other development teams
in your organization to authenticate users
and obtain information about them.
Not only have you met your task for the sprint,
you've solved an organization-wide problem
and problems you'll face in the future
when a new service needs to do the same work.
So that's just a contrived example
of how a problem can be solved at a larger scale.
And not every problem will have such broad applicability,
but it shows the big picture mindset
that more senior developers apply
when thinking about a problem.
As you go about your work,
keep an eye out for opportunities to solve problems
that span multiple teams and departments
within your organization.
You might identify the need for common libraries,
shared services, automation or process improvements needed
across your organization.
The impact you can achieve
with a little second level thinking is amazing
and it will of your reputation as a big picture thinker
that's ready to tackle more advanced problems.